==Plot==
Coraline Jones ([[Dakota Fanning]]) moves into the Pink Palace Apartments in [[Ashland, Oregon]] with her loving but work-consumed parents ([[Teri Hatcher]] and [[John Hodgman]]). While exploring the property for an old well (oblivious that the dowsing rod she's using is poison oak), Coraline encounters a stray black cat ([[Keith David]]) and an odd boy who tends it named Wybie Lovat ([[Robert Bailey Jr.]]). He tells her that his grandmother lived in the Pink Palace as a little girl and now, as its landlady, she doesn't usually rent to people with children.

The following day, Wybie leaves Coraline a package containing a doll that bears an uncanny resemblance to her. While exploring her new surroundings, Coraline finds a small door that's been wallpapered over. She asks her Mother to unlock it, but it only opens to a bricked-up section of wall. That evening, Coraline is disgusted by her Father's nutritious "gourmet" dinner and goes to bed without eating. Just before falling asleep, she wistfully requests a photograph of two friends from Michigan not to forget her and bids goodnight to the Coraline doll. Awakened later that night by the noise of a little button-eyed jumping mouse, she follows it and is amazed to discover a passage extending beyond the door, which leads her to an Other World parallel to the house grounds. 

Upon arrival, Coraline meets button-eyed doppelgangers of her Mother and Father, who claim to be her "Other" parents. Despite initial wariness, she enjoys a sumptuous dinner prepared for her. A cake iced with the words "Welcome Home!" appears and her Other Mother flaunts a seemingly omnipotent capacity for entertaining Coraline's wishes by proposing a game of hide-and-go-seek in the rain and then causing it to rain outside. The Other Mother caresses Coraline's palm, suggesting that mud will heal the poison oak rash. Unnerved, Coraline declares that she's tired and must go to bed, to which the Other Mother responds: "Of course dear, it's all made up." They follow her upstairs to her spectacular Other bedroom to tuck her in. Coraline greets the living toys there with timidity and is delighted to interact with her two friends in the bedside photo. The Other Mother smears some mud on Coraline's palm and whispers, "See you soon." Coraline wakes up in the Real World with her poison oak healed, yet finds the little door is still bricked up. 

At breakfast, Coraline tells her real parents about the Other World. Her Mother suggests she go pester the neighbors downstairs, Miss Spink and Miss Forcible ([[Dawn French]] and [[Jennifer Saunders]]). On the way, Coraline meets the upstairs neighbor, Mr. Bobinsky ([[Ian McShane]]), who accuses <U+201C>Caroline<U+201D> of trying to peek at his <U+201C>circus mice.<U+201D> A moment after bidding her goodbye, he returns to inform Coraline that the mice have a message for her: <U+201C>Don't go in little door.<U+201D> Spink & Forcible also have a message for <U+201C>Caroline.<U+201D> They believe her tea leaves may forebode great danger, in the form of a menacing hand. Departing their apartment, Coraline catches Wybie skulking around in the fog (allegedly hunting for banana slugs). To her disbelief, Wybie explains that the doll is ancient and that his grandmother won't allow him inside the Pink Palace. Coraline gets frustrated with Wybie and accuses him of talking without listening to her, like her parents. In spite of herself however, she can't help laughing at some of his oddball antics. That night Coraline crumbles some cheddar as mice bait by her door and waits. Several come late at night and she follows them into the Other World once more.

Coraline's Other Mother greets her and sends her to bring in her Other Father, who is outside, tending a fantastical glowing garden. On a preying mantis machine (that mimics Coraline's bedside picture-holder in the Real World), she and her Other Father fly up into the air, revealing the garden as a giant depiction of her face. After eating <U+201C>dinner-breakfast food<U+201D> together, the Other parents introduce her to the Other Wybie, a button-eyed boy which the Other Mother has rendered incapable of speech on Coraline's behalf. The two of them visit the Other Mr. Bobinsky upstairs and witness an amazing performance by his trained circus mice. Enthralled and tired, Coraline is tucked into bed and falls asleep immediately thereafter, reawakening once more in the Real World.

Checking the little door, she finds it locked. Coraline tags along as her Mother and Father go into town to submit what they've been working on (a garden catalog) and to go shopping for her school clothes. On the way she relates her adventures in the Other World and is aggravated at not being taken seriously. Coraline tries to convince her Mother to purchase her some day-glo gloves, but her mother only selects very drab and practical items. On the way back home, her Mother tells her she found some rat droppings and suggests that she locked the little door because she <U+201C>thought [Coraline] might feel safer.<U+201D> At home, her Mother realizes she needs to go out again to buy groceries. Coraline declines to come along however, bitterly accusing her Mother of neglecting her wants and visibly hurting her Mother's feelings. When her Mother leaves, Coraline retrieves the key, unlocks the little door and returns to the Other World. Through a window, the black cat watches her enter the passage.

Entering the Other kitchen, Coraline finds the table full of delicious junkfoods and presents for her, with a note from the Other mother, suggesting she go see the Other Miss Spink & Forcible's theatrical performance. Upon exiting the house, Coraline finds the cat. It speaks to her in an arrogant tone, cautioning her about the Other Mother and then bounds off. Coraline finds a seat next to the Other Wybie in the front row of an auditorium packed with button-eyed terriers and the entertainment begins. A "practically naked" Miss Spink and Miss Forcible begin with a competitive burlesque that collapses on itself before segueing into a second act, in which the old women unzip their old bodies and reveal themselves as attractive, young, button-eyed acrobats. They quote from [[What a piece of work is a man|Hamlet]] and swoop across the crowd, pulling Coraline into their routine. After the show, the Other parents are waiting for her atop the stairs. Coraline is ecstatic, but the Other Wybie looks forlorn and is excluded from coming in the house with them. The Other Mother motions threateningly at him to smile, but sheepishly and downcast, he does not oblige. In the house, the Other Mother tells Coraline they'd love for her to stay forever, but that in order to do so, she must have buttons sewn into her eyes. Terrified, she tells them she'd better sleep on it and dashes upstairs. In her Other room, Coraline stuffs the talking toys and the photo of her (newly button-eyed) friends into a trunk, barricades the door with it, dives under the bed covers and tries desperately to fall asleep. She wakes in the morning, still in the Other World.

The door to the room that contains the entrance to the passage is locked tight. Coraline finds the Other Father in his study and asks him where the Other Mother is. But he tells her he's not supposed to speak when the Other Mother isn't around and his behavior frightens her. Coraline runs out of the house and tries to escape by walking away from it. As she gets further away, her surroundings start to appear sketchier; the cat joins her walk while the environment fades away into an entirely blank space. The cat reveals more to Coraline about the nature of the Other World and speculates on the Other Mother's intentions. Having walked the circumference of the small Other World, they both arrive at the house once again. Coraline breaks the door handles of the room with the passage entrance in it and forces her way in, where she finds the small door blocked by a giant beetle-dresser and her Other Mother waiting on the couch. Despite her Other Mother's coaxing, Coraline is resolute that she wants to return home and says she could never love the Other Mother. Angered, the Other Mother transforms into a taller, more fearsome appearance, drags Coraline down the hall by the nose and throws her through the mirror at the end of the hall into a dark cell. There she meets three button-eyed ghosts of children that fell prey to the Other Mother. They request that if she is able to win her freedom, that she might free their souls as well. Just then, Coraline is rescued by the Other Wybie, his mouth knotted up into a frightening grin by the Other Mother. He helps her move the beetle-dresser that blocks the door and Coraline escapes through the passage.

After tumbling back into the Real World, Coraline cannot find her parents anywhere. She rushes to the doorbell when she hears it ring, but it's only Wybie asking for his grandmother's doll back. Coraline frantically tries to explain everything to him, including that his great aunt is an imprisoned ghost-child, but Wybie thinks she's gone crazy and he runs screaming from the house while she throws her boots at him. Coraline goes down to Miss Spink & Forcible's apartment. They don't seem to be any help in finding her lost parents, but they give her a three-cornered stone with a hole in the center, just in case it comes in handy. That night, Coraline cries herself to sleep in her parents' bed between mock-parents made of pillows.

She wakes to the cat purring and pawing her face. Coraline follows the cat to the mirror in the hall, in which she has a vision of her parents shivering and tracing <U+201C>HELP US<U+201D> (backwards) on the glass. They fade away and Coraline pounds the mirror, shattering it. The cat guides her back to her parents' bedroom, where she finds a hidden [[Janus]]-type doll of her parents under the bed, which she burns in the fireplace. Determined to rescue her parents, Coraline suits up and returns to the Other World with the cat at her side. In the passage, he begins to talk, suggesting to Coraline that the Other Mother can't resist games.

Suddenly, Coraline's real Mother appears to be calling to her from the end of the passage, but after Coraline embraces her, it turns out to be the Other Mother in disguise. A rat fetches the key from the real side of the door for the Other Mother, who promptly swallows it. After the Other Mother leaves the room, Coraline hears her parents calling out to her very faintly. Coraline challenges the Other Mother to a game: if Coraline can find and retrieve the souls of the three ghost children and locate her parents, everyone will go free. If she fails, she will stay and let the Other Mother sew buttons over her eyes. The Other Mother agrees, gives her a hint to find the souls (but not her parents) and then vanishes.

In the fantastic garden, with the use of the magic seeing-stone from Spink & Forcible, Coraline is able to locate the first soul: it is attached to the mantis-machine, which her Other Father (now a pumpkin, as punishment for telling her too much) is also attached to. He attacks Coraline against his own will, but is able to free himself enough to hand the soul to her before drowning in the pond. The second soul is located in the grasp of a taffy-like amalgam of the Other Spink & Forcible. Coraline is able to free the soul from the creature's grasp by using her flashlight to provoke the bat-like terriers (that hang from the theater's ceiling) into attacking it. Before confronting the last of the Other Mother's three wonders, Coraline sees the Other Wybie's clothing flapping in the breeze on a post, hung up by the Other Mother to intimidate her. She tries to summon more courage than she truly feels and enters the flat. The final ghost-child's soul is in the grasp of a pack of rats that inhabit the Other Mr. Bobinsky's uniform. They try to convince Coraline to stay in the Other World one last time before scurrying out. When the rat carrying the third soul escapes her grasp, Coraline takes a dizzying fall off the collapsing balcony and she despairs that all is lost. The cat has caught the rat however and delivers it to her, whereupon every part of the Other World outside of the house begins to disintegrate. The cat jumps into Coraline's satchel, and they race into the house, right before the world outside fully disappears. They then proceed to the room with the passage and with the Other Mother waiting in her most [[arachnid|arachnoid]] manifestation.

Having not yet located her parents and with her seeing-stone gone, Coraline is advised by one of the ghost children (through the soul-containing ball she holds) that the Other Mother has no intention of letting her leave regardless of who wins the game. Coraline cleverly tells the Other Mother to open the little door, declaring that her parents are hidden in the passage. The Other Mother coughs up the key and obliges, eager to win the game. While she's distracted, the cat attracts Coraline's attention to a snowglobe on the mantle, in which her parents are trapped. Able to think of no other way to escape, Coraline throws the cat at the Other Mother's face and grabs the snowglobe. The cat scratches the button eyes off the Other Mother's face and escapes through the door. In a rage, the Other Mother transforms the room into a giant spiderweb. Coraline narrowly evades her, scrambling into the door and grabbing the key. With the ghost-children's strength assisting her, Coraline is able to shut the door against the Other Mother and in so doing, she severs the Other Mother's hand. She races to the Real World door and locks it just before the passage collapses.

Looking in her satchel, the snow globe is missing. The snow globe on the Real World mantle is broken however and Coraline hears the front door shut. Her parents enter with snow on their shoulders and tell her a celebration is in order (since they've sold their garden catalog). Tucking Coraline into bed, her mother slips a little box under the cover. After they've left the room, Coraline opens it and tries on one of the day-glo gloves inside. Seeing the cat at the window, Coraline lets him in and apologizes for throwing him at the Other Mother. She puts the three ghost-child ball-souls under her pillow and falls asleep. In her <U+201C>dream,<U+201D> they appear before her as angels and thank her for saving them, but also warn her that she's still in terrible danger because the Other Mother will stop at nothing to get the key back.

Coraline awakes immediately, makes sure the key is still strung on her necklace and discovers the balls (that held the ghost-children's souls) crushed like eggshells under her pillow. As Coraline leaves the house in order to find a hiding place for the key, the Other Mother's disembodied hand crawls out ominously from under the little door. Determined to put the key where she can never retrieve it, Coraline walks through the night to throw it down the well, all the while being stalked by the hand. About to remove it from her neck and drop it in the well, the hand pounces and drags the key and Coraline by the neck back toward the Pink Palace and its little door. Just then, Wybie shows up on his motorbike, brandishing his slug catching tongs, and snatches the hand away. The hand crawls onto his helmet and he skids off his bike, left hanging onto the edge of the well. The hand crawls up his body and is about to cut away his grasp on the edge of the well, when Coraline grabs the hand with the blanket that was around her shoulders; it slices its way loose and is about to attack Coraline, when it is crushed by a large rock dropped by Wybie. They wrap the rock and broken hand in the blanket, tie it with the key necklace and drop it into the well. Coraline asks Wybie why he decided to believe her and he shows her an old photo of his grandma and her sister clutching a button-eyed doll. Coraline thanks Wybie for stalking her with a hard punch on the arm. Wybie suggests that it was the cat's idea to stalk her in the first place, as they cock their heads to one side like the cat.

The final scene is a garden party with all the Pink Palace residents attending, where tulips are being planted in the garden (except for Mr. Bobinsky, who is replacing them with beets). Wybie brings his grandmother to the garden, to whom Coraline says, <U+201C>I have so much to tell you!" The film finishes with the same shot of the Pink Palace that began the film, as the cat stretches his back and disappears behind a signpost into a dimensional rift.
